# Course Policies for COM531: Web Application Development
Professor [Karl Stolley](http://karlstolley.com), Illinois Institute of Technology

## Course Description
A production-intensive course in applied theory and practice of developing
web-based applications, emphasizing interface and experience design using HTML5,
CSS3, and the DOM; and backend development using Ruby-based web application
frameworks. Students will learn agile, modular development techniques grounded
in open-source technologies, including Ubuntu Linux, version control (Git),
jQuery, and Ruby on Rails. Note: students should take [COM 530: Standards-Based
Web Design](http://courses.karlstolley.com/530/) or have a solid command of Web
standards (especially XHTML 1.0 Strict and CSS 1 and 2) prior to enrolling in
this course.

## Course Goals

* Develop user interfaces in emerging Web standards, including HTML5 and CSS3
* Develop strong abilities in using JavaScript and jQuery or another JavaScript
  library/framework for manipulating the Document Object Model (DOM)
* Learn and employ agile development methods for front- and back-end design
* Become familiar with Ruby development frameworks and the Model-View-Controller
  (MVC) architecture
* Explore and design for the affordances and constraints of mobile interfaces
* Connect course content to principles and practices in technical communication
  and information architecture
* Apply course concepts and adjust/extend course projects to fit your own
  academic and professional interests

## Books, Materials, and Technology

### Books

* Castledine, Earle and Sharkie, Craig. _jQuery: Novice to Ninja_.
  SitePoint, 2010. ISBN: 978-0980576856
* Cederholm, Dan. _CSS3 for Web Designers_. A Book Apart, 2010.
  ISBN: 978-0984442522
* Fried, Jason; Hansson, David Heinemeier; and Linderman, Matthew. _Getting Real: The smarter,
  faster, easier way to build a successful web application_. 37signals, 2009. Available:
  <http://gettingreal.37signals.com/toc.php>
* Keith, Jeremy. _DOM Scripting: Web Design with JavaScript and
  the Document Object Model_. Friends of ED, 2005. ISBN: 978-1590595336
* Keith, Jeremy. _HTML5 for Web Designers_. A Book Apart, 2010.
  ISBN: 978-0984442508
* Ruby, Sam. _Agile Web Development with Rails_, 4th Ed.
  Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2010. ISBN: 978-1-93435-654-8
* Swicegood, Travis. _Pragmatic Guide to Git_. Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2011.
  ISBN: 978-1-93435-654-8
* Thomas, Dave, with Fowler, Chad and Hunt, Andy. _Programming Ruby 1.9:
  The Pragmatic Programmers' Guide_, 3rd Ed. Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2009.
  ISBN: 978-1-93435-608-1

### Required Materials and Technology

* A computer running Mac OS X Snow Leopard or better; or Ubuntu Linux or another
  distributions of Linux/Unix (No Windows, no exceptions.)
* A [GitHub](http://github.com) account (free/public or pay/private)
* A private/public DSA key pair on each computer you use
* A Twitter account (we'll be working with the Twitter API)
* A Google account (for Gmail, Google Groups, etc.)
* Some kind of sketchbook (paper or digital)

### Recommended Materials and Technology

* A [Diigo](http://diigo.com/) or other social bookmarking account
* A mobile device running Android or iOS (iPod Touch, iPhone, or iPad)
* An iOS Developer Program Membership (if you have a Mac and iOS device)

## Course Projects, Grading, and Policies

### Course Projects

#### Project 1: Rich UX Interface Design

For this project, you will build the front end/user interface as a
prototype-based proposal for a Web application. It should make use of HTML5 and
jQuery, and perhaps CSS3 on the “experience layer” (Cederholm).

##### Project 1 Deliverables

  * A GitHub Repository showcasing your work from start to finish, featuring frequent, well-crafted commits
  * Weekly tags in GitHub marking your progress on the project
  * The finished prototype, either posted to the Web or in test-ready download form from GitHub, tagged with ‘final-prototype’
  * Weekly in-progress presentations/demonstrations
  * Final presentation

Note: The Web Applications that will make up the team projects from project two will be chosen from
the prototype/proposals in project one. So be awesome.

#### Project 2: Ruby on Rails Web Application

In Project 2, you will work in teams to develop a functional Web application using the Ruby on Rails
web development framework. Your app can be based on one of your team members’ Project 1, or an
entirely new idea generated by the team. You should follow the guidance in _Getting Real_ and _Agile Development with Rails_ where it would help you, and ignore it where it won’t.

##### Project 1 Deliverables

  * Your app, built using Rails 3 and Ruby 1.9.2, and deployed at Heroku or another Rails-friendly hosting service or server (databases, etc. are up to you)
  * A GitHub Repository that tracks your work from start to finish, featuring frequent, well-crafted commits--and that you use to keep up-to-date with the rest of your team members
  * Test cases for all features
  * Weekly tags in GitHub marking your progress on the project
  * Weekly in-progress presentations/demonstrations
  * Final presentation

#### Project 3: Mobile Interface Design

For Project 3, you will focus primarily on a mobile interface for your app developed in project two.
However, you are encouraged to continue to improve the functionality and refine the features of the
app as delivered for project two.

##### Project 3 Deliverables

  * Sketches and prototypes of the interface development
  * Your app with a mobile-friendly interface, preferably using the same URL as the main app
  * A final memo detailing your use of media queries and other mobile-design enhancements

### Grading
Project 1: 20pts
Project 2: 30pts
Project 3: 10pts
Class Participation: 40pts
TOTAL: 100pts

A = 90+ pts; B= 80-89pts; C=70-79pts; E =< 69 pts

### Grading Criteria
* A - Student has turned in all required components of a project, the work is
  exceptional in quality, and reflects the student's dedication to adjusting the
  project to his or her own interests.
* B - Student has turned in all required components of a project and submitted
  work that is acceptable as graduate level.
* C - Student has turned in all required components of a project, but the work
  is below graduate level.
* E - Student has not turned in all required components of a project.

### Attendance and Participation
Your attendance and active participation are required both for your own success
in the class, and for the success of the class as a whole. However, if you
absolutely must miss, please contact me ahead of time via email.

### Academic Honesty
As with any course at IIT, you are expected to uphold the Code of Academic
Honesty (p. 48 of the IIT Graduate Bulletin 2010-2012). All work for this course
should be your own original effort, including print and digital page design and
computer code. Summarizations and quotations of text, as well as any use of
open-source code libraries and images not of your own making, should be clearly
cited as legally and ethically warranted and rhetorically appropriate.

If you are at all uncertain as to whether you are submitting work that in whole
or in part may violate the Code of Academic Honesty, please contact me
immediately and before the work is due. The consequences of academic dishonesty
are severe. Any student who violates the Code of Academic Honesty will be
subject to expulsion from this course with a failing grade, and I will report
the student to the Chair of the Department of Humanities and the Associate Dean
of Graduate Academic Affairs, who may take additional disciplinary action.

### Special Needs Statement
Reasonable accommodations will be made for students with documented
disabilities. In order to receive accommodations, students must obtain a letter
of accommodation from the Center for Disability Resources. The Center for
Disability Resources (CDR) is located in Life Sciences Room 218. Contact the
Center by telephone at 312-567-5744 or via email at disabilities@iit.edu

Students who have any difficulty (either permanent or temporary) that might
affect their ability to perform in class should contact me privately, either in
person or via email, at the start of the semester. Methods, materials, or
deadlines will be adapted as required to ensure equitable participation.

## License
Course materials by [Karl Stolley](http://karlstolley.com). Licensed under a
[Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 United States
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/us/).
